No More Human Art:
Ernest Strauhal and the Use of Generative Adversarial Networks in Artistic Production
By: Ben Read  
	 The past decade has witnessed an upward trend in animosity towards the use of artificial intelligence in artistic production. This discontent, which has admittedly been brewing for some time, has recently exploded out of the hermetic world of art and into general discourse through watershed events such as the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike, which shone a light on the current and growing role of artificial intelligence in the entertainment industry and artistic production more broadly. Now, otherwise respected artistic achievements such as the 2024 movie Late Night with the Devil are met with immense scrutiny, boycotts, and condemnation at even the smallest hint of the use of artificial intelligence. Questions abound: Will AI truly replace artists? Will the hit songs and blockbusters of the future be made by algorithms rather than humans? Perhaps they already are. Amid this tempestuous landscape, there has emerged a contrary motion, that being artists who willingly utilize artificial intelligence in their own work to better understanding the character and limitations of these new technologies. One such individual is Ernest Strauhal, a multimedia artist who combines traditional methods of drawing, videography, and music with artificial intelligence, specifically generative adversarial networks, or GANs, such as Pix2pix and StyleGAN. It is through an analysis of his work that further insights might be gained into the various questions and problematics which surround the utilization of artificial intelligence in artistic production. Namely, we will examine how Strauhal’s art inspects the boundaries, or lack thereof, between GAN and artist, as well as the impact that GANs can have on the spatiotemporal character of a work of art. All this will eventually coalesce into a consideration of why, in the face of mounting adversity, artificial intelligence continues to be used within artistic production at an ever-accelerating pace. 
	Before we continue, it is necessary to provide a brief account of both Strauhal’s work, as well as the GANs which he utilizes in their production. Despite the popularity of the term “artificial intelligence”, the label can be somewhat misleading, as it lumps together a myriad of disparate processes. A generative adversarial network, one subset of “artificial intelligence”, consists of two opposing networks—a generative network and a discriminatory network— which are simultaneously trained on a shared dataset and against each other. Both networks have opposing roles within a zero-sum game, wherein the generative network ties to produce an image which tricks the discriminatory network, and the discriminatory network ties to catch any image which is not part of the original data set. The generated image which is ultimately produced must therefore be close enough to the real images of the dataset to fool the discriminatory network. As stated by Ian Goodfellow, the dynamic within a GAN is analogous to the dynamic between counterfeiters and the police, with the counterfeiters (the generative network) succeeding only when their product is indistinguishable from the real entity to fool the police (the discriminatory network). However, under the umbrella of GANs there are a plethora of varying types, each with their own quirks and uses. For the purposes of this essay, we will be focusing on two GANs, namely Pix2Pix and StyleGAN, as these are the two programs utilized by Strauhal for his pictorial and video art, respectively. 
	Pix2Pix, which was developed in 2016, is a conditional generative adversarial network, or cGAN, which allows for image-to-image translation. Unlike a regular GAN, a cGAN trains both the generator and discriminator on auxiliary information, which allows for a more controlled output. Taken within the context of image-to-image translation, this auxiliary information allows for the translation of a black and white image into a color image, an edge map into a photograph, an image of the day into an image of the night, etc. StyleGAN, unlike Pix2Pix, is a progressive generative adversarial network with a neural style transfer which allows for the creation of video as well as static images. Unlike a cGAN, a progressive generative adversarial network, or pGAN, trains both the generator network and discriminatory network through added layers of detail, where the image begins at a lower resolution with layers continually added to create a final high-resolution image. In addition, a neural style transfer allows for the movement between images dependent upon “styles” which are connected to specific layers of detail, namely high level attributes such as pose and figure and stochastic variations such as hair and freckles. The result in StyleGAN is a process which allows for the creation of videos which transition through the various levels of the pGAN. In other words, if you have two specific faces, StyleGAN will move between them gradually based on the characteristics each face possesses, with these characteristics being delegated to various layers of detail.
	How then are these various GANs utilized in Strauhal’s pictorial and video production? The majority of Strauhal’s pictorial work is created in three phases: the drawing phase, the GAN phase, and the editing phase. Strauhal beings by drawing a single line on sheet of paper, the contours of which he then follows with successive semi-parallel lines until a large geometric patten is created. The resulting image is then sent though Pix2Pix to colorize the image based on the image-to-image translation capacities of the cGAN. Finally, Strauhal takes the output of Pix2Pix and edits it in photoshop, focusing primarily on color correction, with the result being the finished image. An example of this process would be his Untitled 4 (2022) and Untitled 4 (Color Study 1) (2023), with the former being his unmanipulated drawing, and the latter being the retouched output from Pix2Pix. His video practice follows a similar trajectory, albeit with the use of StyleGAN rather than Pix2Pix. In the case of his Vocal Study 3 (2024), Strauhal trained StyleGAN on video of himself dancing, with the resulting video being an algorithmic interpretation of his own actions. Another example is his Untitled 15 (Dynamic Color Study 1) (2023), which mixes his pictorial and video practice, as it utilizes his line drawings, but rather than a static colorized image, the generated colors follow a looping pattern. All this provides a glimpse into the role which GANs have in the production of Strauhal’s varying artworks; It is now possible to address how this utilization of GANs affects the relation between artist and artwork, as well as the spatiotemporal character of art.
	On the issue of authorship and artificial intelligence, Strauhal describes his relationship to GANs as a “tug of war”, a constant battle raged between man and machine. When looking at Strauhal’s artistic process, this tension is immediately apparent. Taking Untitled 4 (Color Study 1) as an example, these moments of conflict arise once Pix2Pix forms an output based off the original Untitled 4, and during the subsequent editing process. Untitled 4 was created without the use of any artificial intelligence—Strauhal describes the slow process of drawing line after line as deeply personal and often meditative in character. However, in the process of creating of Untitled 4 (Color Study 1), the image of Untitled 4 becomes infused with color at the tangentially directed whim of an exterior artificial entity. The output is then curbed back towards Strauhal’s intent through the editing process, the colors slightly adjusted to create a different aesthetic outcome. In effect, this is Strauhal’s attempt to regain some semblance of control over this exterior entity. Here, Pix2Pix is treated as a co-collaborator, but one whose work is always subordinate to Strauhal and able to be altered or rejected depending on Strauhal’s aesthetic judgement. It is the momentary separation of artist from artwork, of artist from their power over their artwork, only for the results of that separation to return under the jurisdiction of the artist. It is this movement away from the artists hand through an ulterior process and back towards it that Strauhal describes as the blending of himself and the machine, and where the difficulties of artistic authorship surrounding the use of artificial intelligence lie. For while Strauhal can direct the GANs’ output, it will inevitably make additions which could not be explicitly predicted. 
	The work which perhaps best evinces this tug of war is his Vocal Study 3, as in it, video of Strauhal’s movements and recordings of Strauhal’s voice are sent through StyleGAN, with the output consisting of the artificial intelligence’s interpolation and continuation of these movements and sounds. Strauhal describes this effect of seeing the GAN continue his motions and voice in perpetuity as looking at a doppelganger or looking at oneself in the mirror and seeing the reflection smile back. Taking that which is most vital to human identity—voice, physique, creative capacity—and seeing it played with in this way creates an extraordinary tension and questions the boundaries between artist and artificial intelligence. Fundamentally, the tension between these two entities, man and machine, is one of control. Who controls the artwork in this sense, the artist or the AI? Within Strauhal’s work, both are equally essential. Of course, the entire project would not occur without the artists initiation and oversight, but much of the aesthetic character of pieces such as Vocal Study 3 and Untitled 4 (Color Study 1) are the result of the specific GAN outputs. This relinquishment of control over his body and creations to the artificial intelligence spurs equal dread and fascination from Strauhal, a response shared by many, for the utilization of artificial intelligence is in some ways the willful choice to give over your power of willful choice. It is to say, “do what you will”; however, for Strauhal the power ultimately resides within the creator to again edit the outputs of that generative process, so that control is never fully taken, but only gifted for short periods of algorithmic variation. 
	Another problematic of artificial intelligence which Strauhal’s work addresses is the effect which such networks have on the spatiotemporal character of a work of art. This is not to say that works of art created with the use of artificial intelligence have a different spatiotemporal relation to the viewer compared to “traditional” artworks, but rather that the utilization of artificial intelligence modifies the way in which we perceive space and time within the artwork itself. Strauhal describes his video works such as Vocal Study 3 and Untitled 15 (Dynamic Color Study 1) as, “dead architecture with the illusion of movement.” This is insofar as all that occurs within these videos is not only entirely predetermined by the GAN, but likewise exist as fabrications created by the GAN which never occurred outside of digital space. Every event within Vocal Study 3 is not movement, an act positioned within space and time; they are a deftly assembled collection of datapoints assembled to provide the illusion of action. The illusion of temporal duration and spatial extension transcends the optic space of Greenbergian formalism, and moves further into a dead, digital space which is entirely predetermined, yet in that predeterminedness attempts to appear as spontaneous. Each transition of pixels from one frame to the next is a phantomic echo of Strauhal’s actual motions, it is an uncanny binary switch which, while dependent upon the continuance of space and time as metaphysical categories, are entirely divorced from them in terms of the content depicted. No art could exist without some relation to space and time, as without space and time human experience as it is broadly conceived would be impossible; however, time and space here are entirely dead, no new action occurs, indeed no action could occur. What is present is merely the shift from one pixel to the next which from our position as viewer coalesces into something resembling a man dancing.
	Having now addressed how Strauhal’s work relates to issues of authorship and spatiotemporality, it is now possible to question why, with all the backlash against artificial intelligence, it is still being utilized at an ever-accelerating pace? Strauhal argues that artificial intelligence makes “clean art, devoid of human imperfection,” with this purity actualizing the human drive for idealist creation evident as far as back into intellectual history as Plato. Humans, Strauhal argues, want that which is devoid of our imperfections, and artificial intelligence allows for humanity to finally gather this sterile artistic output in a direct and accessible way. However, there is a major problem with this logic insofar as artificial intelligence cannot be divorced from humanity in such a way since all the data which trains GANs was at one point made by a human, and indeed the very processes which allow for the GAN to function were created by a human. John Searle addressed this illusion of a knowing machine in his famous Chinese Room thought experiment, arguing that while machines can mimic the semantic form of words, they are unable to understand the semantic content of words. In this way, GANs and other artificial intelligence are able to mimic our artistic language, but they can never understand or autonomously generate our artistic language. They can chop and rearrange human creation to the point that it appears new and shiny, but underneath, all artificial intelligence has achieved is its use value as a tool designed by, and entirely dependent upon, humanity. 
	Another possibility is that artificial intelligence appears to entirely democratize the artistic process. Words such as talent and skill are nullified when one can, with the click of the button, produce a theoretically infinite collection of “fine artworks.” In the information age, which was built upon the promise of a democratic forum accessible to all, such a tool appears to level the playing field and remove all the hierarchy of the artistic world. Yet, this wish is likewise an illusion, as again, all the art produced through artificial intelligence is the result of other artists creations. Talent and skill, although fraught terms, persist underneath the surface of this democratic promise, for while everyone can now access a readymade art piece, underneath this art piece is a hierarchy of artists which continues to feed this machine, willfully or not. Indeed, theft is a massive issue with GANs, as datasets are often comprised of works taken without permission from their creators. Strauhal admits that this theft, something entirely undemocratic, is a problem with the current use practices of artificial intelligence and something which he acknowledges as a major issue for creators such as himself. Therefore, the seemingly pure democracy of GANs more properly resembles a total anarchy, wherein the strong take what they can, or a totalitarian state, wherein the totality of society works for the aim of the generative machine. Therefore, in either formulation, the reasons for the persistence of artificial intelligence are built upon fallacious propositions.
It is essential to recognize that these problematics are not new. In 1821, the German inventor Dietrich Nikolaus Winkel created what he called the Componium, which was a dual piped organ which had the miraculous ability to algorithmically select from numerous musical snippets, creating a “new” piece of music in a manner not at all dissimilar from GANs. The responses of the time varied greatly, with some arguing that the Componium might solve the problems of composing, allowing for everyone to share in the wonders of musical generation, while others argued that while the Componium was a marvel of technology, it could never replace the genius of a real human mind. This same battle rages on today, and whatever the reason for its continued success, the various aspects of artificial intelligence are here to stay, at least for the near future. For artists such as Ernest Strauhal, this continuing explosion of artificial intelligence offers ever increasing opportunities for new artistic experiments and investigations into the nature of both generative machines, as well as the human drive to utilize them for artistic aims. 
	
Bibliography
Karras, Tero; Laine, Samuli; Time Aila. “A Style-Based Generator Architecture for Generative Adversarial Networks.” ArXiv (2018).
Karras, Tero; Aila, Timo; Laine, Samuli; Lehtinen, Jaakko. “Progressive Growing of GANs for Improved Quality, Stability, and Variation.” ArXiv (2017).
 Goodfellow, Ian; Pouget-Abadie, Jean; Mirza, Mehdi; Xu, Bing; Warde-Farley, David; Ozair, Sherjil; Courville, Aaron; Bengio, Yoshua. “Generative Adversarial Nets.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27 (2014): 2672–2680.
Isola, Phillip; Zhu, Jun-Yan; Zhou, Tinghui; Efros, Alexei. “Image-to-Image Translation with Conditional Adversarial Networks.” Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2016): 5967-5976.
Mirza, Mehdi and Osindero, Simon. “Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets.” ArXiv (2014)
Greenberg. Clement. “Modernist Painting.” In Esthetics Contemporary, edited by Richard Kostelanetz, 198-206. Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1978. 
Searle, John. “Minds, brains, and programs.” The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3 (1980): 417-457.
